About the Tutorial
Formula One racing, also known as F1 racing, is the principal form of motor sport,
usually associated with the thrill and excitement of speed racing. This tutorial
explains all the elements involved in F1 racing, such as the rules and regulations
and the essential gears involved in the sport. A brief on the best-in-class racers is
also provided at the conclusion of the document.
The information here is meant to supplement your knowledge on the sport.
However, it is not a comprehensive guide on how to play the sport.

Audience
This tutorial is meant for those who want to know all about Formula One racing.
It is prepared keeping in mind that the reader is unaware about the basics of the
sport. It is a basic guide to help a beginner understand the sport.

Prerequisites
Before proceeding with this tutorial, you are required to have a passion for the
sport and an eagerness to acquire knowledge on the same.

Overview
Formula One, also called F1 in short, is an international auto racing sport. F1 is
the highest level of single-seat, open-wheel and open-cockpit professional motor
racing contest.
Formula One racing is governed and sanctioned by a world body called the FIA -
Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile or the International Automobile
Federation. The name ‘Formula’ comes from the set of rules that the participating
cars and drivers must follow.

Objective
The objective of a Formula 1 contest is to determine the winner of a race. The
driver who crosses the finish line first after completing a pre-determined number
of laps is declared the winner.

Formula One – History & Team Size
Formula 1 racing originated during the 1920-30s in Europe from other similar
racing competitions. In 1946, the FIA standardized racing rules and this formed
the basis of Formula One racing. The inaugural Formula One World Drivers’
championship was then held in 1950, the first world championship series.
Apart from the world championship series, many other non-championship F1 races
were also held, but as the costs of conducting these contests got higher, such
races were discontinued after 1983.
Each F1 team can have maximum of four drivers per season. There is support staff
with every F1 team that plays a vital role in the team’s success.

Number of Grand Prix in a Season
The number of Grand Prix in a season has varied through the years, starting from
1950 which had 7 races. This number kept increasing up to a maximum of 20 GPs
a year (in 2012). Normally there are 19 to 20 GPs in a season now. The 2015 F1
season has 19 Grand Prix, out of which 8 have been completed.

Grand Prix Naming
Each GP in a season is hosted by a different country and are named after the host
country. Example: A GP held in Australia is called an Australian Grand Prix, that
held in Monaco is called the Monaco Grand Prix and so on. However, a GP can be
held in same or different cities of the host country every year.

Grand Prix Racing Distance
The minimum total distance of a Grand Prix race, including all the pre-defined
number of laps must be 300 km or 190 miles. This is the standard distance for all
races except for the Monaco GP which is 260 km or 160 miles.

Number of Teams in F1 World Championship
10 teams with two cars each are permitted to compete in the F1 World
Championship as of 2015. That is, a total of 20 cars can enter the competition.
However, the FIA regulations allow a limit of 26 cars for the championship.

Grand Prix World Championships 
The results of all the Grand Prix races in a season are taken together to determine
two annual Championship awards. They are:
1. Drivers' Championship Award (for the drivers)
2. Constructors' Championship Award (for the constructors)
The terms ‘drivers’ and ‘constructors’ are explained in later chapters.

FORMULA ONE CAR-DESIGN,SPECS,RULES
A Formula One car is an open-wheel, open-cockpit, single-seat racing car for the
purpose of being used in Formula One competitions. It is equipped with two wings
(front and rear) plus an engine, which is located behind the driver.
The F1 races are conducted on specifically built racing tracks called ‘circuits’.
Sometimes they are conducted on closed public roads as well.

Construction
Every F1 car is composed of two main components - the chassis and the engine.
Chassis: Formula One cars these days are made from carbon fiber and ultra-
lightweight components. The weight must be not less than 702 kg or 1548 lbs,
including the driver and tires, but excluding the fuel.
The dimensions of a Formula One car must be maximum 180 cm (width) x 95cm
(height); there is no specified number for maximum length, but all cars tend to
be of almost the same length.
Engine: According to regulation changes in 2014, all F1 cars must deploy 1.6 liter
turbocharged V6 engines.

Gearbox
Semi-automatic sequential carbon titanium gearboxes are used by F1 cars
presently, with 8 forward gears and 1 reverse gear, with rear-wheel drive.

Steering Wheel
The steering wheel of an F1 car is equipped to perform many functions like
changing gears, changing brake pressure, calling the radio, fuel adjustment, and
so on.

Fuel
The fuel used by Formula One cars is a tightly controlled mixture of ordinary petrol,
and can only contain commercial gasoline compounds rather than alcohol
compounds.

Tires
Formula One cars have been using smooth thread, slick tires since 2009. The tire
dimensions of an F1 car are:
Front Tire - 245mm (width)
Rear Tires - 355mm and 380mm (width)

Brakes
Formula One cars use disc brakes with a rotor and caliper at each tire.

Speed and Performance 
All F1 cars can accelerate from 0 to 100 mph (160 kmph) and decelerate back to
0 in under 5 seconds. F1 cars have reached top speeds of about 300 kmph or 185
mph on an average.
However, some cars, without fully complying with F1 standards have attained
speed of 400 kmph or more. These numbers are mostly same for all F1 cars but
slight variations may exist due to the gears and aerodynamics configuration.

Safety Gear 
Safety is high priority in motor sports. Formula One has seen many tragedies in
its early days with many casualties that included drivers and spectators as cars
crashed at high speeds. Engineers researched using latest technology to build
safer cars and gear for drivers. This has certainly reduced the number of incidents
over the last decade. Let’s know about the different safety gears used by drivers
in this chapter.

Helmets: Helmets are compulsory in F1
races. Their built is very strong and light so
that it doesn’t add extra weight on driver’s
head at high speeds. These are fire resistant
also. Of course, the helmets have to meet FIA
standards. The helmet comprises of several
layers that undergo severe tests. Normally,
the weight of the helmet is around 1.2 kg.
Interestingly, the helmets of F1 are painted
by hand.

HANS: HANS stands for Head and Neck Support. The purpose of HANS is to
protect the driver’s vertebrae and collision of head to the steering wheel in case
of an accident. It is built using carbon fiber material and is attached to the seat
belt in the cockpit. It is coupled with elastic straps. HANS was inducted by FIA
after a major collision in 1995, Australian GP.

Clothing: The clothing of F1 drivers is
designed to protect them from fire accidents
in case of crash. It is a multilayered suit that
matches specifications of NASA.
Nomex is the latest fiber material brand used
to build suits for F1 drivers. The suit
undergoes thermal testing; it is fire resistant
and lightweight. The suit is worn by the pit
crew also. The outfit is washed and dry-
cleaned multiple times before undergoing tests. There are two handles on
shoulders of suit so that it can be strapped with seat. This allows the pit crew to
pull the driver out in one piece with seat during a crash to reduce injuries. Nomex
fiber can survive temperatures up to 700-800 degree Celsius for more than 10
seconds.

Popular Terms 

107% rule – A driver should not exceed 107 percent of fastest time in qualifying
session; if he fails to do so, then he is not allowed to start the race. He is allowed
to start if he sets a suitable time during the practice session.

Backmarker – The drivers lagging behind are called backmarkers. They are
shown blue flag to give way for leading drivers.

Blistering – Improper selection of tire compound can cause excess heat that can
lead to chunks of rubber breaking off from the tire. This is called blistering.

Cockpit – The seating area of the driver in a F1 car is called the cockpit.

Delta Time – The difference of time between two laps or two cars is referred to
as delta time.

Drive-through penalty – A penalty imposed for minor offence or violation of
rules on track. It requires the driver to drive at a minimum speed and enter the
pit lane without stopping. The driver is allowed to re-join the race.

Flat spot – The portion of the tire where it is heavily worn out due to spin or
extreme breaking is called the flat spot.

Formation lap or warm-up lap – Cars are driven for a lap from the grid before
the start of the race and then get back to grid positions. This is known as the
warm-up lap.

Jump start – Sensors are installed at grid positions to monitor the cars that start
before all the red lights go off signaling the start of race. Such start is called jump
start and the driver earns a penalty for it.

Lollipop – The sign board at the pit stop that signals the driver to apply brakes
and stay in first gear before the car is lowered from jacks.

Parc ferme – A restricted area where no team members are allowed and all race
cars are driven here after completion of practice or race. This area is supervised
by race stewards only.

Pit board – A board held at pit wall to inform the driver about delta time,
remaining number of laps, and current position.

Pit wall – It is F1 team area where the manager, engineers, and support staff
keep close watch on their cars using small screens under a shelter.

Pit – An area of the track separated by a wall. Cars enter team’s pit garage for
change of wheels, refuel the car, and set up other changes.

Pole position – Driver who recorded fastest time during qualifying session is
awarded the first grid position on race day.

Steward – A high-ranked official appointed for races to make decisions.

Tire warmer – An electronic blanket is wrapped around the tires before cars are
positioned for race that keeps them at optimum temperatures before the start of
the race.

Visor strip – The top edge of helmet needs extra protection and it is provided
with a visor strip made of Zylon that is a high-resistant carbon fiber material.

Constructor – Since 1981, FIA has passed a rule that respective F1 teams have
to build their own engine and chassis of the car. The owner of the engine and
chassis is called the constructor.

Circuit - Formula One circuits are tracks specifically and purposefully built for
conducting races. F1 circuits are of two types – Street Circuit and Road Circuit.

Rules and Regulations

A Formula One race starts with a warm-up lap, called the formation lap and the
pit lanes are opened of this purpose 30 minutes before the actual race begins. Pit
lanes are tracks away from the grid and are parallel to the start/finish line.
During this time, the drivers are free to take any number of warm-up drives,
without actually going on the grid. After the pit lane closes, the drivers must take
their places on the grid in their qualifying order.
Once all the cars have taken their positions on the grid, the race begins with the
starting lights - 10 red lights in 5 pairs of columns.
Each column lights one after the other, at an interval of 1 second from left to right
direction. After all, 5 columns are illuminated, they stay in that way for a few
seconds and then all of them are extinguished at once and the race begins.
If the start is interrupted due to any circumstances, the 5 red lights illuminate
again but are not extinguished, instead orange lights are lit up and the race is
restarted.
The drivers who finish at first, second and third positions at the end of the race
stand on a podium and are awarded trophies. A constructor's trophy is also
presented to the winner's team.

Race Distance and Duration
The length of the race must be 305 km (260 km in case of Monaco GP) and is
defined as "the smallest number of complete laps that exceeds 305 kilometers".
The number of laps in a race is obtained by dividing 305 by the length of a lap,
which differs from track to track.
The duration of the race cannot be more than 2 hours. If the allocated time of 2
hours is exceeded, the race is considered to be finished at the end of the ongoing
lap.

Refueling
Refueling during races was allowed earlier, but from 2010 this has been abolished.
As a result, every car must ensure a loaded tank before the race begins. However,
refueling during races will be permitted again from the 2017 season.

Racing Flags
Similar to motor sports and other racing competitions, racing flags are used in
Formula One to send out various messages and signals to the drivers like the race
start or finish, lap indication, bad weather indication, etc.
Three categories of flags are used in F1 racing. They are:
Status Flags
Instruction Flags
The Chequered Flag

Status Flags
There are 5 status flags –
1. Green Flag: It is used to indicate the start of a race or the restart of a race
stopped due to a temporary delay.
2. Yellow Flag: It is an indication of caution to the drivers to go slow due to
some accident or hazard on the track or due to rain.
3. Red Flag: It is an indication of danger, especially bad weather conditions
and signals the drivers to stop or return to the pit immediately, depending
on the situation.
4. Red & Yellow Striped Flag: It indicates that the conditions of the track
have been modified by car debris, spilled oil or sand and could cause
problems like loss of control and reduced grip.
5. White Flag: It is displayed at the end of free practice sessions (Friday &
Saturday) on the last corner and pit straight, indicating to the drivers that
other drivers are engaged in practice on pit straight.

Instruction Flags
These flags communicate with only one driver at a time and are of 5 types –
1. Black Flag: It is shown to impose penalty when a driver has broken some
rules and instruct the driver to get back to the pit.
2. Black Flag with Orange Circle: It indicates that a car is being asked to
return to the cockpit due to technical problems like fuel leak, water leak or
oil leak, that might interfere with the proceedings of the race.
3. Per-bend black/white flag: One diagonal of this flag is black and the
other diagonal is white and is an indication of penalty on the driver due to
lack of sportsmanship behavior.
4. Black flag with white cross: This flag is black with two white diagonal
crosses and is waved when a driver ignores other black flags and instructs
the driver that his car is not scoring anymore.
5. Blue Flag: It indicates to the driver that another faster car is coming
towards his direction and that he should make way for the faster car.

The Chequered Flag
The chequered flag is waved at the finish line, indicating that the race is officially
over.